Integration Tests
--------------------

A set of integration tests validate the released :doc:`Aether
Blueprints </onramp/blueprints>`.  The tests are managed by Jenkins,
and can be monitored using the following `Dashboard
<https://jenkins.aetherproject.org/>`__.  Log files generated by
recent runs are available on that site.

Source code for the integration tests can be found in the
`aether-jenkins repo
<https://github.com/opennetworkinglab/aether-jenkins>`__ on
GitHub, where each file in the repo corresponds to a Groovy script
that implements a Jenkins pipeline for one of the blueprints.

The pipelines are executed daily, with each pipeline parameterized to
run in multiple jobs. The ``${AgentLabel}`` parameter selects the
Ubuntu release being tested (currently ``22.04`` and ``24.04``), with
all jobs running in AWS VMs (currently resourced as
``M7iFlex2xlarge``).  Pipelines that exercise two-server
tests—currently ``ueransim.groovy``, ``upf.groovy``,
``srsran.groovy``, and ``gnbsim.groovy``\—invoke the `AWS CLI
<https://aws.amazon.com/cli/>`__ to create the second VM.

All VMs created by Jenkins run images prepared using Packer, with the
current specification templates available in the `aether-packer repo
<https://github.com/opennetworkinglab/aether-packer>`__ on GitHub.

Finally, note that the integration tests run a variety of simulated 5G
workloads, including gNBsim, UERANSIM, OAI 5G RAN (in simulation
mode), and srsRAN (in simulation mode). Of these, gNBsim provides the
most rigorous testing of the Core's control plane, and serves as
Aether's primary validation of that functionality. More information
about gNBsim can be found in the :doc:`Emulated RAN
</onramp/gnbsim>` section of this Guide.
